---
title: 'Blog Post number 1'
date: 2012-08-14
permalink: /posts/2012/08/blog-post-1/
tags:
  - cool posts
  - category1
  - category2
---
he microscopic definition for the Cauchy stress tensor has been examined in the
past from many different perspectives. This has led to different expressions for the stress
tensor and consequently the “correct” definition has been a subject of debate and contro-
versy. In this work, a unified framework is set up in which all existing definitions can be
derived, thus establishing the connections between them. The framework is based on the
non-equilibrium statistical mechanics procedure introduced by Irving, Kirkwood and Noll,
followed by spatial averaging. The Irving–Kirkwood–Noll procedure is extended to multi-
body potentials with continuously differentiable extensions and generalized to non-straight
bonds, which may be important for particles with internal structure. Connections between
this approach and the direct spatial averaging approach of Murdoch and Hardy are discussed
and the Murdoch–Hardy procedure is systematized. Possible sources of non-uniqueness of
the stress tensor, resulting separately from both procedures, are identified and addressed.
Numerical experiments using molecular dynamics and lattice statics are conducted to ex-
amine the behavior of the resulting stress definitions including their convergence with the
spatial averaging domain size and their symmetry properties.
The authors would like to dedicate this article to Jack Irving, who passed away in 2008 at the age of 87.
Irving, while a graduate student on leave from Princeton, worked with Prof. John Kirkwood at Caltech
on the fundamental non-equilibrium statistical mechanics theory which serves as the basis for the
present article.
This work was partly supported through NSF (DMS-0757355). This article has drawn heavily upon
material from Ellad Tadmor and Ronald Miller, Modeling Materials: Continuum, Atomistic and
Multiscale Techniques, ©2010 Ellad Tadmor and Ronald Miller, forthcoming Cambridge University
Press, reproduced with permission.
N.C. Admal (  ) · E.B. Tadmor
Department of Aerospace Engineering and Mechanics, The University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, MN, USA
e-mail: admal002@umn.edu
E.B. Tadmor
e-mail: tadmor@aem.umn.edu64
N.C. Admal, E.B. Tadmor
Keywords Stress · Microscopic interpretation · Statistical mechanics ·
Irving–Kirkwood–Noll procedure · Spatial averaging
Mathematics Subject Classification (2000) 74A25
1 Introduction
Continuum mechanics provides an efficient theoretical framework for modeling materials
science phenomena. To characterize the behavior of materials, constitutive relations serve
as an input to the continuum theory. These constitutive models have functional forms which
must be consistent with material frame-indifference and the laws of thermodynamics and
include parameters that are fitted to reproduce experimental observations. With the advent
of modern computing power, atomistic simulations through “numerical experiments” offer
the potential for studying different materials and arriving at their constitutive laws from first
principles. This could make it possible to design new materials and to improve the properties
of existing materials in a systematic fashion. To use the data obtained from an atomistic sim-
ulation to build a constitutive law, which is framed in the language of continuum mechanics,
it is necessary to understand the connection between continuum fields and the underlying
microscopic dynamics.
Another arena where the connection between continuum and atomistic concepts is im-
portant is the field of multiscale modeling. This discipline involves the development of
computational tools for studying problems where two or more length and/or time scales
play a major role in determining macroscopic behavior. A prototypical example is frac-
ture mechanics where the behavior of a crack is controlled by atomic-scale phenomena at
the crack-tip, while at the same time long-range elastic stress fields are set up in the body.
Many advances have been made in the area of multiscale modeling in recent years. Some
common atomistic/continuum coupling methods are quasicontinuum [53, 59], coupling of
lengthscales [51], cluster quasicontinuum [31], bridging domain [66], coupled atomistics
and discrete dislocations [54], and heterogeneous multiscale methods [15], to name just a
few. Refer to [58] for a comparison of some prominent atomistic/continuum coupling mul-
tiscale methods. In a multiscale method, a key issue involves the transfer of information
between the discrete model and the continuum model. It is therefore of practical interest
to understand how to construct definitions of continuum fields for an atomistic system, to
ensure a smooth transfer of information between the discrete and continuum domains.
In this paper, we focus on just one aspect of the continuum-atomistic connection, namely
the interpretation of the (Cauchy) stress tensor in a discrete system. This question has been
explored from many different perspectives for nearly two hundred years and this has led
to various definitions that do not appear to be consistent with each other. As a result, the
“correct” definition for the stress tensor has been a subject of great debate and controversy.
We begin with a brief historical survey.
1.1 A Brief History of Microscopic Definitions for the Stress Tensor
Interest in microscopic definitions for the stress tensor dates back at least to Cauchy in the
1820s [5, 6] with his aim to define stress in a crystalline solid. Cauchy’s original definition
emerges from the intuitive idea of identifying stress with the force per unit area carried by
the bonds that cross a given surface. A comprehensive derivation of Cauchy’s approach is
given in Note B of Love’s classic book on the theory of elasticity [35]. Since this approach
is tied to the particular surface being considered, it actually constitutes a definition for theA Unified Interpretation of Stress in Molecular Systems
65
traction (or stress vector) and not for the stress tensor. The first definition of stress as a
tensorial quantity follows from the works of Clausius [8] and Maxwell [40, 41] in the form
of virial theorem. Clausius states the virial theorem as
The mean vis viva of a system is equal to its virial.
By “vis viva” (literally “living force”), Clausius means kinetic energy, while the term “vir-
ial” comes from the Latin “vis” (pl. “vires”) meaning force. The virial theorem leads to a
definition for pressure in a gas. Maxwell [40, 41] extended Clausius’ work and showed the
existence of a tensorial version of the virial theorem (see Appendix A). The virial stress re-
sulting from the virial theorem is widely used even today in many atomistic simulations due
to its simple form and ease of computation. Unlike Cauchy’s original definition for stress,
the virial stress includes a contribution due to the kinetic energy of the particles. This dis-
crepancy was addressed by Tsai [63], who extended the definition given by Cauchy to finite
temperature by taking into consideration the momentum flux passing through the surface.
Let us refer to this stress vector as the Tsai traction.
An alternative approach for defining the stress tensor was pioneered in the landmark
paper of Irving and Kirkwood [27]. Irving and Kirkwood derived the equations of hydro-
dynamics from the principles of non-equilibrium classical statistical mechanics and in the
process established a pointwise definition for various continuum fields including the stress
tensor. Although their work was indeed noteworthy, the stress tensor obtained involved a
series expansion of the Dirac delta distribution which is not mathematically rigorous. Con-
tinuing their work, Noll [48] proved two lemmas, which allowed him to avoid the use of
the Dirac delta distribution, and thus arrive at a closed-form expression for the stress tensor
which does not involve a series expansion. We refer to the procedure introduced by Irving
and Kirkwood and extended by Noll as the Irving–Kirkwood–Noll procedure. Schofield and
Henderson [52] highlighted the non-uniqueness present in the stress tensor derived by Irving
and Kirkwood, and pointed out that it could result in a non-symmetric stress tensor. There
have been several attempts to improve on the Irving and Kirkwood procedure. In particular,
Lutsko [36] reformulated this procedure in Fourier space. An error in Lutsko’s derivation
was corrected by Cormier et al. [9].
Due to the stochastic nature of the Irving and Kirkwood stress, many difficulties arise
when one tries to use their expression in atomistic simulations. To avoid these difficulties,
Hardy and co-workers [23, 24] and independently Murdoch [43–47] developed a new ap-
proach that bypasses the mathematical complexity of the Irving and Kirkwood procedure.
This is done by defining continuum fields as direct spatial averages of the discrete equations
of motion using weighting functions with compact support. In particular, this approach leads
to the so-called Hardy stress [23] often used in molecular dynamics simulations. Murdoch
in [45] provides an excellent description of the spatial averaging approaches currently being
used and discusses the non-uniqueness of the stress tensor resulting from the spatial aver-
aging procedure. We refer to the direct spatial averaging approach as the Murdoch–Hardy
procedure.
Another approach, which leads to a stress tensor very similar to that obtained by Irving
and Kirkwood is the reformulation of elasticity theory using peridynamics [55]. Lehoucq
and Silling [33] have recently shown that Noll’s solution is a minimum solution in a vari-
ational sense. Morante et al. [42] proposed a new approach for defining the stress tensor
using the invariance of partition function under infinitesimal canonical point transforma-
tions. However, their approach is limited to equilibrium statistical mechanics and involves
taking derivatives of delta distributions.
We can summarize the “state of the art” for the microscopic definition of the stress ten-
sor as follows. There are currently at least three definitions for the stress tensor which are66
N.C. Admal, E.B. Tadmor
commonly used in atomistic simulations: the virial stress, the Tsai traction, and the Hardy
stress [68]. The importance of the Irving and Kirkwood formulation is recognized, how-
ever, it is not normally used in practice and its connection with the other stress definitions is
not commonly understood. The difference between pointwise stress measures and temporal
and/or spatially-averaged quantities is often not fully appreciated. The result is that the con-
nection between the Cauchy stress tensor defined in continu
